=== СТРАНИЦА 1 ===
US011620567B2
a2) United States Patent (10) Patent No.: US 11,620,567 B2
Zhang et al. (45) Date of Patent: Apr. 4, 2023
(54) METHOD, APPARATUS, DEVICE AND (52) U.S. Cl.
STORAGE MEDIUM FOR PREDICTING CPC wee GO6N 20/00 (2019.01); GO6N 5/04
PROTEIN BINDING SITE (2013.01); GI6B 20/30 (2019.02); G16B
30/00 (2019.02); GI6B 40/00 (2019.02)
(71) Applicants:SHENZHEN UNIVERSITY, (58) Field of Classification Search
Guangdong (CN); HARBIN CPC ........ G16B 30/00; G16B 20/00; G16B 30/10;
INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY G16B 40/00; G16B 20/30; G16B 40/20;
SHENZHEN GRADUATE SCHOOL, (Continued)
Guangdong (CN)
(56) References Cited
(72) Inventors: Yong Zhang, Guangdong (CN); Wei
He, Guangdong (CN); Yong Xu, U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS
Guangdong (CN): Dongning Zhao, 2016/0148074 AL* 5/2016 Jean veccccsssssseue. GOOF 16/5854
Guangdong (CN) 382/190
(73) Assignees: SHENZHEN UNIVERSITY, Shenzhen
(CN); HARBIN INSTITUTE OF OTHER PUBLICATIONS
TECHNOLOGY SHENZHEN Zhou et al., PDNAsite: Identification of DNAbinding Site from
GRADUATE SCHOOL, Shenzhen Protein Sequence by Incorporating Spatial and Sequence Context,
(CN) Jun. 10, 2016 [retrieved Aug. 22, 2022], Scientific Reports, vol. 6,
Article No. 27653 (2016), pp. 1-15. Retrieved: https://www.nature.
(*) Notice: Subject to any disclaimer, the term of this com/articles/srep27653 (Year: 2016).*
patent is extended or adjusted under 35 (Continued)
U.S.C. 154(b) by 1107 days.
Primary Examiner — Matthew C Bella
(21) Appl. No.: 16/255,857 Assistant Examiner — Dennis Rosario
(22) Filed: Jan. 24, 2019 (57) ABSTRACT
(65) Prior Publication Data The invention provides a method, apparatus, device and
storage medium for predicting a protein binding site. The
US 2019/0156915 Al May 23, 2019 method comprises the steps of: receiving a protein sequence
. to be predicted, dividing the protein sequence by using a
Related U.S. Application Data preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain a plurality
(63) Continuation of application No. of amino acid sub-sequences, building word vectors for the
PCT/CN2017/100314, filed on Sep. 4, 2017. protein sequence according to the amino acid sub-se-
quences, extracting document features from word elements,
(30) Foreign Application Priority Data building document feature vectors for the protein sequence
according to the extracted document features, extracting
Aug. 31, 2017 9 (CN) weeeeeeeeeesess 201710770933 .2 protein chain biological features from the amino acid sub-
sequences, building biological feature vectors for the protein
(51) Int. CL sequence according to the extracted biological features,
GI16B 40/00 (2019.01) classifying the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the
GO6N 20/00 (2019.01) document feature vectors and the biological feature vectors
(Continued) (Continued)
- - - — - S101
Reecive a proicin scquence to be predicted, and divide the protein
plurality of amino acid sub-sequences forming the protein sequence to
be predicted
:
amino acid sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word elements to
express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, extract document features
trom the word elements, and build document feature vectors for the protein
sequence according to the extracted document features
$103
Extract protein chain biological features from the amino acid sub-
feature vectors for the protein sequence according to the extracted
biological features
$104
Classify the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the document
feature vectors and the biological feature vectors by using a preset
amino acid residue classification model to obtain amino acid residue
types for the protein sequence

=== СТРАНИЦА 2 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
Page 2
by using a preset amino acid residue classification model to incorporating evolutionary_information_into_pseudo_amino_acid_
obtain amino acid residue types for the protein sequence. composition_via_the_top-n-gram_approach (Year: 2014).*
Firdaus et al., Protein Structural Class Prediction Using Predicted.
9 Claims, 3 Drawing Sheets Secondary Structure and Hydropathy Profile, Jul. 2013 [retrieved
Aug. 22, 2022], C3S2E ’13: Proceedings of the International C
Conference on Computer Science and Software Engineering, pp.
49-57. Retrieved: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2494444.
(51) Int. Cl. 2494459 (Year: 2013).* cee |
GOGN 5/04 (2023.01) Lin et al., Classification and differential metabolite discovery of
liver diseases based on plasma metabolic profiling and support
G16B 30/00 (2019.01) vector machines, Sep. 15, 2011 [retrieved Aug. 22, 2022], Journal
G16B 20/30 (2019.01) of Separation Science, vol. 34, Issue 21. pp. 3029-3036. Retrieved:
(58) Field of Classification Search https://analyticalsciencejournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.
CPC wee GI6B 40/30; GO6T 7/0012; GO6T 1002/jssc.201100408 (Year: 2011).*
2207/30004: GO6T 2207/20081: GO6T Cheng et al., Predicting RNA-binding sites of proteins using support
2207 /20021: GO06V 2201/03 . GO6V vector machines and evolutionary information, Dec. 12, 2008
20/698; GO6N 3/08; GO6N 20/00; GO6K [retrieved Aug. 22, 2022], BMC Bioinformatics: Seventh Interna-
9/6267; A61B 5/7267; A61B 5/7264 tional Conference on Bioinformatics, vol. 9, Supplement 12, 19
. : pages. (Year: 2005) Retrieved: https://obmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.
See application file for complete search history. comVarticles/10.1186/1471-2105-9-S12-S6 (Year: 2008).*
. Dong et al., Application of latent semantic analysis to protein
(56) References Cited remote homology detection, Nov. 29, 2005 [retrieved Aug. 22,
2022], Bioinformatics, vol. 22, Issue 3, pp. 285-290. Retrieved:
OTHER PUBLICATIONS 200 NP Comin or ai aS a208 (Year:
Xu etal, Identification of DNA-binding proteins by incorporating Sy ¥ictor Machine with PSSM Profiles, May 20-22, 2016 [retrieved
evolutionary information into pseudo amino acid composition via Nov. 18, 2022], 2016 IEEE Information Technology, Networking,
the top-n-gram approach, Oct. 28, 2014 [retrieved Aug. 22, 2022], Elect and Auto Control Conf, pp. 502-505. Retrieved: https://
Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics, vol. 33, Issue 8, ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7560411 (Year: 2016).*
13 pages. Retrieved: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
266152208 _Identification_of_DNA-binding proteins_by_ * cited by examiner

=== СТРАНИЦА 3 ===
U.S. Patent Apr. 4, 2023 Sheet 1 of 3 US 11,620,567 B2
; ; ; — : S101
Receive a protein sequence to be predicted, and divide the protein
sequence by using a preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain a
plurality of amino acid sub-sequences forming the protein sequence to
be predicted
: : : $102
Build word vectors for the protein sequence according to the plurality of
amino acid sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word elements to
express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, extract document features
from the word elements, and build document feature vectors for the protein
sequence according to the extracted document features
. * . . . 7 Ss 1 03
Extract protein chain biological features from the amino acid sub-
sequences expressed with the word elements, and build biological
feature vectors for the protein sequence according to the extracted
biological features
$104
Classify the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the document
feature vectors and the biological feature vectors by using a preset
amino acid residue classification model to obtain amino acid residue
types for the protein sequence
FIG. 1
21
Sequence Division
Unit
22
First Vector Building
Unit
23
Second Vector Building
Unit
24
Result Acquisition Unit
FIG. 2

=== СТРАНИЦА 4 ===
U.S. Patent Apr. 4, 2023 Sheet 2 of 3 US 11,620,567 B2
31
Trained Sequence
Division Unit
32
First Feature Processing
Unit
33
Second Feature
Processing Unit
34
Model Training Unit
35
Sequence Division Unit
36
First Vector Building
Unit
37
Second Vector Building
Unit
38
Result Acquisition Unit
Feature Merging 381
Unit
Feature 382
Classification Unit
FIG. 3

=== СТРАНИЦА 5 ===
U.S. Patent Apr. 4, 2023 Sheet 3 of 3 US 11,620,567 B2
4
Computing Device
4] 40
Storage
42 Processor
Computer
Program
FIG. 4

=== СТРАНИЦА 6 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
1 2
METHOD, APPARATUS, DEVICE AND information among amino acid residues, leading to low
STORAGE MEDIUM FOR PREDICTING accuracy and generality in the prediction of the protein
PROTEIN BINDING SITE binding sites.
CROSS REFERENCE TO RELATED 5 BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
APPLICATION
An object of the invention is to provide a method,
The present application is a Continuation Application of | apparatus, computing device and storage medium for pre-
PCT application No. PCT/CN2017/100314 filed on Sep. 4, dicting a protein binding site, intended to solve the problems
2017, which claims the benefit of Chinese patent application 10 of low accuracy and generality in the prediction of the
No. 201710770933.2 filed on Aug. 31, 2017. All the above protein binding site in the prior art.
are hereby incorporated by reference. In one aspect, the invention provides a method for pre-
dicting a protein binding site, which comprises the following
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION steps of:
15 receiving a protein sequence to be predicted, and dividing
1. Technical Field the protein sequence by using a preset sliding window and
sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino acid sub-se-
The invention belongs to the technical field of biological quences forming the protein sequence;
information, and in particular relates to a method, apparatus, building word vectors for the protein sequence according
device and storage medium for predicting a protein binding 20 to the plurality of amino acid sub-sequences, with the word
site. vectors having word elements to express the respective
amino acid sub-sequences, extracting document features
2. Description of Related Art from the word elements, and building document feature
vectors for the protein sequence according to the extracted
In recent years, bioinformatics has received widespread 25 document features;
attention from people, and more and more researchers in extracting protein chain biological features from the
different fields have devoted themselves to the research amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the word ele-
work on the bioinformatics. As a comprehensive discipline ments, and building biological feature vectors for the protein
that studies information content and information flow in the sequence according to the extracted biological features; and
biology and biology related systems, the bioinformatics has 30 classifying the document feature vectors and the biologi-
a knowledge system incorporating the knowledge from cal feature vectors by using a preset amino acid residue
many different disciplines, such as biology (genetics, bio- classification model to obtain amino acid residue types for
chemistry, etc.), mathematics (probability theory and math- the protein sequence.
ematical statistics, algorithms, etc.), computer science (ma- In another aspect, the invention provides an apparatus for
chine learning, computational theory, etc.), and physical 35 predicting a protein binding site, which comprises:
chemistry (molecular modeling, thermodynamics, etc.). a sequence division unit for receiving a protein sequence
As an embodiment of life activities and the most impor- to be predicted, and dividing the protein sequence by using
tant basic unit by which all living beings express life, a preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain a plurality
proteins can be regarded as the smallest automatic machine of amino acid sub-sequences forming the protein sequence;
in nature, and have an irreplaceable role in the operation of 40 a first vector building unit for building word vectors for
biological systems. Different roles played by the proteins in the protein sequence according to the plurality of amino acid
cells are regulated by interactions between proteins, between sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word elements
proteins and DNAs, between proteins and RNAs, and to express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, extract-
between proteins and ligands. The protein-protein interac- ing document features from the word elements, and building
tions involve the association of protein molecules, which 45 document feature vectors for the protein sequence according
plays a critical role in every biological process of living to the extracted document features;
cells, such as DNA synthesis, gene transcriptional activa- a second vector building unit for extracting protein chain
tion, protein translation, modification and localization, and biological features from the amino acid sub-sequences
information transmission. All of these important biological expressed with the word elements, and building biological
processes involve the protein-protein interactions. Thus, 50 feature vectors for the protein sequence according to the
exploring the sequence and structural properties for the extracted biological features; and
protein-protein interactions is of great importance for under- a result acquisition unit for classifying the document
standing cellular activities. feature vectors and the biological feature vectors by using a
With the continuous development of the next-generation preset amino acid residue classification model to obtain
sequencing technology, the measured protein sequence data 55 amino acid residue types for the protein sequence.
is increasing. As a result, there is a growing demand of In another aspect, the invention further provides a com-
people for computational tools that can quickly and reliably puting environment for dividing the sequence and building
recognize protein binding sites. The localization of the the classification model, as well as a computer program
protein binding sites is of great importance for the analysis runnable in the environment, where the steps of the method
and understanding of the molecular details of protein inter- 60 for predicting the protein binding site as described are
actions and the protein functions. At present, the researches accomplished when the processor executes the computer
and predictions on the protein binding sites at home and program.
abroad are mostly based on the physical and chemical In another aspect, the invention further provides a com-
features obtained by technically determining a single site, puter-readable storage medium, which stores a computer
and the inter-site sequence features obtained by analyzing 65 program executed by a processor to accomplish the steps of
and calculating protein chains. This neglects the clustering the method for predicting the protein binding site as
property of the protein binding sites and the association described.

=== СТРАНИЦА 7 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
3 4

The invention involves the steps of: receiving a protein acid sub-sequences forming the protein sequence to be
sequence to be predicted, and dividing the protein sequence predicted, thereby taking local blocks of the protein
by using a preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain | sequence as subsequent analysis units.

a plurality of amino acid sub-sequences forming the protein In this embodiment of the invention, preferably, the
sequence to be predicted; building word vectors for the 5 sliding window has the size of (2*window+1-2*b), wherein
protein sequence according to the plurality of amino acid window 1s a preset value, and bisa randomly generated
sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word elements variable ranging from 0 to window-1. This sliding window
to express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, extract- includes window-b neighborhood residues at each side of a
ing document features from word elements, and building target residue, and as the window slides on the amino acid
document feature vectors for the protein sequence according 1° sequence, its size randomly changes between 3(b—window-
to the extracted document features; extracting protein chain 1) and 2*window+ 1(b=0) to obtain protein blocks formed by
biological features from the amino acid sub-sequences, and several amino acid residues, thereby facilitating subsequent
building biological feature vectors for the protein sequence analysis in which the protein blocks are taken as the basic
according to the extracted biological features; and classify- units, which fully demonstrates the clustering property of
ing the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with both the 15 the protein binding site and further improves the subsequent
document feature vectors and the biological feature vectors feature expression ability, prediction precision and general-

by using a preset amino acid residue classification model to ily. . . . . . .
obtain amino acid residue types for the protein sequence, Preferably, an amino acid residue classification model is
thereby improving the accuracy and generality in the pre- obtained by training with machine learning before the pro-
diction of the protein binding site. 20 tein sequence to be predicted is received. Preferably, a
Stacking ensemble learning algorithm can be used for
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE SEVERAL machine learning to improve the classification accuracy and
VIEWS OF THE DRAWINGS generalization ability of the amino acid residue classification

model.

FIG. 1 is a flow chart showing the implementation of a 25 Preferably, when the amino acid residue classification
method for predicting a protein binding site according to | model is obtained by training with machine learning, a
Embodiment 1 of the invention; trained protein sequence in a preset training set is first

FIG. 2 is a schematic view showing the structure of an _ divided by using a preset sliding window and sliding step to
apparatus for predicting a protein binding site according to obtain a plurality of trained amino acid sub-sequences
Embodiment 2 of the invention; 30 forming the trained protein sequence; then trained word

FIG. 3 is a schematic view showing the structure of an vectors for the trained protein sequence are built according
apparatus for predicting a protein binding site according to 10 _ the obtained plurality of trained amino acid sub-se-
Embodiment 3 of the invention; and quences, with the trained word vectors having trained word

FIG. 4 is a schematic view showing the structure of a elements to express the respective trained amino acid sub-
computing device provided by Embodiment 4 of the inven- 35 sequences, document features are extracted from the trained
tion. word elements, and trained document feature vectors are

built for the trained protein sequence according to the

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE extracted document features; protein chain biological fea-
INVENTION tures are extracted from the trained amino acid sub-se-

40 quences expressed with the trained word elements, and

To make the objects, technical solutions and advantages trained biological feature vectors are built for the trained
of the invention more clear and explicit, the invention will protein sequence according to the extracted biological fea-
be further illustrated in detail with reference to the accom- __ tures; and finally, a pre-built classification model is trained
panying drawings and embodiments. It should be under- by using the trained amino acid sub-sequences expressed
stood that the embodiments as described herein are only 45 with the trained document feature vectors and the trained
intended to explain, instead of limiting, the invention. biological feature vectors, and when a preset training ter-

The specific implementation of the invention is described mination condition is met, the classification model obtained
in detail below in conjunction with particular embodiments. from the training is set as the amino acid residue classifi-

cation model. Therefore, the classification model is provided
Embodiment 1 50 for the subsequent amino acid residue classification, which
increases the classification efficiency of the classification

FIG. 1 shows a process flow for implementing a method model. Moreover, the training termination condition can be
for predicting a protein binding site provided by Embodi- set as a preset number of times that the number of training
ment 1 of the invention, which only shows sections related times is to reach or a preset value that losses are to reach
to the embodiment of the invention for the convenience of 55 during training.
illustration, with the details described as follows. Specifically, a Stacking ensemble learning algorithm is

At $101, receive a protein sequence to be predicted, and used to train a preset model after many types of features are
divide the protein sequence by using a preset sliding window obtained, so as to obtain an amino acid residue classification
and sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino acid sub- model. At a first layer of the Stacking model, different types
sequences forming the protein sequence to be predicted. 60 of protein chain biological features are used respectively to

This embodiment of the invention is suitable for a system train multiple base classifiers, and then, prediction results of
for predicting a protein binding site. In this embodiment of the multiple base classifiers are merged with the document
the invention, to embody the clustering property of a pro- feature vectors to serve as a final feature vector for training,
tein-protein binding site, the sliding window is started after thereby obtaining the amino acid residue classification
the protein sequence to be predicted is received, the protein 65 model.
sequence is divided by adjusting the size of the sliding At $102, build word vectors for the protein sequence
window and the sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino according to the plurality of amino acid sub-sequences, with

=== СТРАНИЦА 8 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
5 6
the word vectors having word elements to express the invention, which only shows sections related to the embodi-
respective amino acid sub-sequences, extract document fea- ment of the invention for the convenience of illustration,
tures from the word elements, and build document feature wherein the apparatus comprises:
vectors for the protein sequence according to the extracted a sequence division unit 21 for receiving a protein
document features. . . . 5 sequence to be predicted, and dividing the protein sequence

In this embodiment of the invention, after a plurality of by usi lidj ind d sliding step to obtai
amino acid sub-sequences are obtained by dividing the y using a Preset Shans Window anc sizang step to obtain
sequence, word vectors are first built for the protein a plurality of amino acid sub-sequences forming the protein
sequence according to the plurality of amino acid sub- sequence to be predicted;
sequences, with the word vectors having word elements to 10 a first vector building unit 22 for building word vectors for
express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, document the protein sequence according to the plurality of amino acid
features are then extracted from the word elements, and sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word elements
finally, document feature vectors are built for the protein to express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, extract-
sequence according to the extracted document features. ing document features from the word elements, and building
Moreover, the extracted document features include a TFIDF document feature vectors for the protein sequence according
sequence feature and a N-gram sequence feature and others. 15 to the extracted di t features:

Preferably, when the word vectors are built for the protein ONE CREAN COCEMIEDE TAUTES . .
sequence according to the amino acid sub-sequences, a a second vector building unit 23 for extracting protein
unique number is allocated to every type of amino acid chain biological features from the amino acid sub-sequences
sub-sequence, and a word2vec algorithm is used to map the expressed with the word elements, and building biological
original unique numbers of the sub-sequences to a K-di- 20 feature vectors for the protein sequence according to the
mensional vector space to obtain the word vectors of the extracted biological features; and
protein sequence. In this way, the feature dimension can be a result acquisition unit 24 for classifying the amino acid
effectively reduced to seek feature expression at a deeper sub-sequences expressed with the document feature vectors
layer for the document data, and all the data in the high- and the biological feature vectors by using a preset amino
dimensional word vectors are leveraged to make the data 25 acid residue classification model to obtain amino acid resi-
scale greater, which facilitates the subsequent classification due types for the protein sequence.
effect. In this embodiment of the present, the sequence division

At $103, extract protein chain biological features from the : : : , .

. : : unit 21 receives a protein sequence to be predicted, and
amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the word ele- divides the tej b . + slidi
ments, and build biological feature vectors for the protein 30 wi Protein sequence Sy using a preset sine
sequence according to the extracted biological features. window and sliding step to obtain a plurality of anno acid

In this embodiment of the invention, the protein chain SUb-sequences forming the protein sequence to be predicted;
biological features are first extracted from the amino acid _ the first vector building unit 22 builds word vectors for the
sub-sequences obtained by dividing the sequence, and then — protein sequence according to the plurality of amino acid
the biological feature vectors are built for the protein sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word elements
sequence according to the extracted biological features, 35 to express the respective amino acid sub-sequences, extracts
where the extracted biological features include features such document features from word elements, and builds docu-
as a location specific scoring matrix feature and a pseudo ment feature vectors for the protein sequence according to
amino acid composition feature, therefore, local information the extracted document features; the second vector building
such as the order of appearance of the amino acid in the unit 23 extracts protein chain biological features from the
sequence is expressed effectively, enhancing the ability of 40 amino acid sub-sequences, and builds biological feature
the feature vectors for expressing the protein sequence vectors for the protein sequence according to the extracted
information and further increasing the comprehensiveness biological features; and the result acquisition unit 24 clas-
of the biological features in the biological feature vectors. sifies the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with both the

At $104, classify the amino acid sub-sequences expressed document feature vectors and the biological feature vectors
with the document feature vectors and the biological feature 45 by using a preset amino acid residue classification model to
vectors by using a preset amino acid residue classification obtain amino acid residue types for the protein sequence,
model to obtain amino acid residue types for the protein thereby improving the accuracy and generality in the pre-
sequence. diction of the protein binding site.

In this embodiment of the invention, the types of the In this embodiment of the invention, the respective units
amino acid residues are used to illustrate whether the amino 50 ofthe apparatus for predicting the protein binding site can be
acid residues are binding sites of the protein sequence. implemented with corresponding hardware or software
Preferably, when the document feature vectors and the units, and every unit may be either an independent software
biological feature vectors are classified, the biological fea- or hardware unit or an integrated software or hardware unit,
ture vectors are first predicted, prediction results as predicted which is not intended to limit the invention herein. The
are then merged with the document feature vectors, and 55 description of foregoing Embodiment 1 can be referred to
finally, the merged feature vectors obtained by feature for the particular implementations of respective units, which
merging are classified to further improve the accuracy in the will not be repeated here.
prediction of the protein binding site. Moreover, the preset
amino acid residue classification model is the amino acid Embodiment 3
residue classification model obtained through the foregoing 60
training so that the accuracy in the prediction of the binding FIG. 3 shows a structure of an apparatus for predicting a
site of the protein sequence is improved. protein binding site provided by Embodiment 3 of the

invention, which only shows sections related to the embodi-
Embodiment 2 ment of the invention for the convenience of illustration,
65 wherein the apparatus comprises:

FIG. 2 shows a structure of an apparatus for predicting a a trained sequence division unit 31 for dividing a trained

protein binding site provided by Embodiment 2 of the protein sequence in a preset training set by using a preset

=== СТРАНИЦА 9 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
7 8
sliding window and sliding step to obtain a plurality of model. At a first layer of the Stacking model, different types
trained amino acid sub-sequences forming the trained pro- of protein chain biological features are used respectively to
tein sequence; train multiple base classifiers, and then, prediction results of

a first feature processing unit 32 for building trained word the multiple base classifiers are merged with the document
vectors for the trained protein sequence according to the 5 feature vectors to serve as a final feature vector for training,
plurality of trained amino acid sub-sequences, with the thereby obtaining the amino acid residue classification
trained word vectors having trained word elements to model.
express the respective trained amino acid sub-sequences, A sequence division unit 35 is used for receiving a protein
extracting document features from the trained word ele- sequence to be predicted, and dividing the protein sequence
ments, and building trained document feature vectors for the 10 by using a preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain
trained protein sequence according to the extracted docu- a plurality of amino acid sub-sequences forming the protein
ment features; sequence to be predicted.

a second feature processing unit 33 for extracting protein In this embodiment of the invention, to embody the
chain biological features from the trained amino acid sub- clustering property of a protein-protein binding site, the
sequences expressed with the trained word elements, and 15 sequence division unit 35 starts the sliding window after the
building trained biological feature vectors for the trained protein sequence to be predicted is received, the protein
protein sequence according to the extracted biological fea- sequence is divided by adjusting the size of the sliding
tures; and window and the sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino

a model training unit 34 for training a pre-built classifi- acid sub-sequences forming the protein sequence to be
cation model by using the trained amino acid sub-sequences 20 predicted, thereby taking local blocks of the protein
expressed with the trained document feature vectors and the sequence as subsequent analysis units.
trained biological feature vectors, and when a preset training In this embodiment of the invention, preferably, the
termination condition is met, setting the classification model sliding window has the size of (2*window+1-2*b), wherein
obtained from the training as the amino acid residue clas- window is a preset value, and b is a randomly generated
sification model. 25 variable ranging from 0 to window-1. This sliding window

In this embodiment of the invention, the amino acid includes window-b neighborhood residues at each side of a
residue classification model is obtained by training with target residue, and as the window slides on the amino acid
machine learning before the protein sequence to be predicted sequence, its size randomly changes between 3(b=window-
is received. Preferably, a Stacking ensemble learning algo- 1) and 2*window+1(b=0) to obtain protein blocks formed by
rithm can be used for machine learning to improve the 30 several amino acid residues, facilitating subsequent analysis
classification accuracy and generalization ability of the in which the protein blocks are taken as the basic units,
amino acid residue classification model. which fully demonstrates the clustering property of the

Specifically, when the amino acid residue classification protein binding site and further improves the subsequent
model is obtained by training with machine learning, the feature expression ability, prediction precision and general-
trained sequence division unit 31 first divides a trained 35 ity.
protein sequence in a preset training set by using a preset A first vector building unit 36 is used for building word
sliding window and sliding step to obtain a plurality of vectors for the protein sequence according to the plurality of
trained amino acid sub-sequences forming the trained pro- amino acid sub-sequences, with the word vectors having
tein sequence; then the first feature processing unit 32 builds word elements to express the respective amino acid sub-
trained word vectors for the trained protein sequence accord- 40 sequences, extracting document features from the word
ing to the obtained plurality of trained amino acid sub- elements, and building document feature vectors for the
sequences, with the trained word vectors having trained protein sequence according to the extracted document fea-
word elements to express the respective trained amino acid tures.
sub-sequences, extracts document features from the trained In this embodiment of the invention, after a plurality of
word elements, and builds trained document feature vectors 45 amino acid sub-sequences are obtained by dividing the
for the trained protein sequence according to the extracted sequence, the first vector building unit 36 first builds word
document features; the second feature processing unit 33 vectors for the protein sequence according to the plurality of
extracts protein chain biological features from the trained amino acid sub-sequences, with the word vectors having
amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the trained word word elements to express the respective amino acid sub-
elements, and builds trained biological feature vectors for 50 sequences, then extracts document features from the word
the trained protein sequence according to the extracted elements, and finally builds document feature vectors for the
biological features; and finally, the model training unit 34 protein sequence according to the extracted document fea-
trains a pre-built classification model by using the trained tures. Moreover, the extracted document features include a
amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the trained docu- TFIDF sequence feature and an N-gram sequence feature
ment feature vectors and the trained biological feature 55 and others.
vectors, and when a preset training termination condition is Preferably, when the word vectors are built for the protein
met, sets the classification model obtained from the training sequence according to the amino acid sub-sequences, a
as the amino acid residue classification model. Therefore, unique number is allocated to every type of amino acid
the classification model is provided for the subsequent sub-sequence, and a word2vec algorithm is used to map the
amino acid residue classification, which increases the clas- 60 original unique numbers of the sub-sequences to a K-di-
sification efficiency of the classification model. Moreover, mensional vector space to obtain the word vectors of the
the training termination condition can be set as a preset protein sequence. In this way, the feature dimension can be
number of times that the number of training times is to reach effectively reduced to seek feature expression at a deeper
or a preset value that losses are to reach during training. layer for the document data, and all the data in the high-

Specifically, a Stacking ensemble learning algorithm is 65 dimensional word vectors are leveraged to make the data
used to train a preset model after many types of features are scale greater, which facilitates the subsequent classification
obtained, so as to obtain an amino acid residue classification effect.

=== СТРАНИЦА 10 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
9 10
A second vector building unit 37 is used for extracting each apparatus above, for example, the functions of the units
protein chain biological features from the amino acid sub- 21 to 24 shown in FIG. 2 and the units 31 to 38 shown in
sequences expressed with the word elements, and building FIG. 3.
biological feature vectors for the protein sequence according In this embodiment of the invention, when the processor
to the extracted biological features. 5 40 executes the computer program 42 to accomplish the
In this embodiment of the invention, the second vector steps in the embodiment of the method for predicting the
building unit 37 first extracts the protein chain biological respective protein binding site above, a protein sequence to
features from the amino acid sub-sequences obtained by _e predicted is received divided by using a preset sliding
dividing the sequence, and then builds the biological feature window and sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino acid
vectors for the protein sequence according to the extracted 10 sub-sequences forming the protein sequence to be predicted:
biological features, where the extracted biological features word vectors are built for the protein sequence according to
include features such as a location specific scoring matrix the plurality of amino acid sub-sequences. with the word
feature and a pseudo amino acid composition feature, there- P ty qhences, .
fore, local information such as the order of appearance of the vectors having word elements expressing the respective
amino acid in the sequence is expressed effectively, enhanc- 15 amino acid sub-sequences, document features are extracted
ing the ability of the feature vectors for expressing the from word elements, and document feature vectors are built
protein sequence information and further increasing the for the protein sequence according to the extracted docu-
comprehensiveness of the biological features in the biologi- ment features; protein chain biological features are extracted
cal feature vectors. from the amino acid sub-sequences, and biological feature
A result acquisition unit 38 is used for classifying the 20 vectors are built for the protein sequence according to the
amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the document extracted biological features; and the amino acid sub-se-
feature vectors and the biological feature vectors by using a | quences expressed with both the document feature vectors
preset amino acid residue classification model to obtain and the biological feature vectors are classified by using a
amino acid residue types for the protein sequence. preset amino acid residue classification model to obtain
In this embodiment of the invention, the types of the 25 amino acid residue types for the protein sequence, thereby
amino acid residues are used to illustrate whether the amino improving the accuracy and generality in the prediction of
acid residues are binding sites of the protein sequence. the protein binding site. The method described in this
Preferably, when the document feature vectors and the Embodiment can be referred to Embodiment 1 for the details
biological feature vectors are classified, the biological fea- of the steps accomplished when the processor 40 in the
ture vectors are first predicted, prediction results as predicted 30 computing device 4 executes the computer program, which
are then merged with the document feature vectors, and will not be repeated here.
finally, the merged feature vectors obtained by feature
merging are classified to further improve the accuracy in the Embodiment 5
prediction of the protein binding site. Moreover, the preset
amino acid residue classification model is the amino acid 35 ‘In this embodiment of the invention, a computer-readable
residue classification model obtained through the foregoing storage medium is provided, which stores a computer pro-
training so that the accuracy in the prediction of the binding gram executed by a processor to accomplish the steps in the
site of the protein sequence is improved. embodiment of the method for predicting the protein binding
Therefore, preferably, the result acquisition unit 38 com- site above, for example, S101 to $104 shown in FIG. 1. Or,
prises: 40 the computer program is executed by the processor to
a feature merging unit 381 for predicting the biological accomplish the functions of respective units in the embodi-
feature vectors and performing feature merging on predic- ments of each apparatus above, for example, the functions of
tion results predicted and the document feature vectors; and ‘the units 21 to 24 shown in FIG. 2 and the units 31 to 38
a feature classification unit 382 for classifying merged shown in FIG. 3.
feature vectors obtained through the feature merging. 45 This embodiment of the invention involves the steps of:
In this embodiment of the invention, the respective units receiving a protein sequence to be predicted, and dividing
of the apparatus for predicting the protein binding sitecanbe the protein sequence by using a preset sliding window and
implemented with corresponding hardware or software sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino acid sub-se-
units, and every unit may be either an independent software | quences forming the protein sequence to be predicted;
or hardware unit or an integrated software or hardware unit, 50 building word vectors for the protein sequence according to
which is not intended to limit the invention herein. the plurality of amino acid sub-sequences, with the word
vectors having word elements to express the respective
Embodiment 4 amino acid sub-sequences, extracting document features
from word elements, and building document feature vectors
FIG. 4 shows a structure of a computing device provided 55 for the protein sequence according to the extracted docu-
in Embodiment 4 of the invention, which only shows ment features; extracting protein chain biological features
sections related to the embodiment of the invention for the from the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the word
convenience of illustration. elements, and building biological feature vectors for the
The computing device 4 in the embodiment of the inven- protein sequence according to the extracted biological fea-
tion comprises a processor 40, a storage 41 and a computer 60 tures; and classifying the amino acid sub-sequences
program 42 stored in the storage 41 and runnable on the expressed with the document feature vectors and the bio-
processor 40. The processor 40 executes the computer logical feature vectors by using a preset amino acid residue
program 42 to accomplish the steps in the embodiment of the classification model to obtain amino acid residue types for
method for predicting the protein binding site as described the protein sequence, thereby improving the accuracy and
above, for example, $101 to S104 shown in FIG. 1. Or, the 65 generality in the prediction of the protein binding site. The
processor 40 executes the computer program 42 to accom- steps described in the embodiment of the method can be
plish the functions of respective units in the embodiments of further referred to for the method for predicting the protein

=== СТРАНИЦА 11 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
11 12
binding site as accomplished when the computer program is sification model obtained from the training as the
executed by the processor, which will not be repeated here. amino acid residue classification model.

The computer readable storage medium of the embodi- 3. The method according to claim 2, wherein the docu-
ment of the invention may include any entity or apparatus ment features comprise a Term Frequency-Invers Document
capable of carrying computer program codes and recording 5 Frequency (TFIDF) sequence feature and a N-gram
medium, for example, storages such as ROM/RAM, disks, sequence feature, and the protein chain biological features
optical disks and flash memories. ; comprise a location specific scoring matrix feature and a

The description above provides only preferred emibodi- pseudo amino acid composition feature.
ments of the invention, but 1s not intended to limit the 4. The method according to claim 1, wherein the docu-
invention. Any modifications, equivalent substitutions, 10 .

: : wae . ment features comprise a Term Frequency-Invers Document
improvements and the like made within the spirit and

a . . : Frequency (TFIDF) sequence feature and a N-gram
principle of the invention are construed to be incorporated . toa .

wpe : : : sequence feature, and the protein chain biological features
within the protection scope of the invention. : locati fi . x f d

What is claimed is: comprise a location specific scoring matrix feature and a

1. A method for predicting a protein binding site, com- 15 pseudo amino acid composition feature. :
prising the following steps of: 5. The method according to claim 1, wherein the step of

receiving a protein sequence to be predicted, and dividing _ Classifying the document feature vectors and the biological

the protein sequence by using a preset sliding window feature vectors by using a preset amino acid residue classi-

and sliding step to obtain a plurality of amino acid _ fication model comprises the sub-steps of:

sub-sequences forming the protein sequence; 20 -predicting the biological feature vectors and performing
building word vectors for the protein sequence according feature merging on prediction results predicted and the

to the plurality of amino acid sub-sequences, with the document feature vectors; and

word vectors having word elements to express the classifying merged feature vectors obtained through the

respective amino acid sub-sequences, extracting docu- feature merging.

ment features from the word elements, and building 25 6. An apparatus for predicting a protein binding site,

document feature vectors for the protein sequence comprising:

according to the extracted document features; a sequence division unit for receiving a protein sequence
extracting protein chain biological features from the to be predicted, and dividing the protein sequence by

amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the word using a preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain

elements, and building biological feature vectors for 30 a plurality of amino acid sub-sequences forming the

the protein sequence according to the extracted protein protein sequence;

chain biological features; and a first vector building unit for building word vectors for
classifying the amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the protein sequence according to the plurality of amino

the document feature vectors and the biological feature acid sub-sequences, with the word vectors having word

vectors by using a preset amino acid residue classifi- 35 elements to express the respective amino acid sub-

cation model to obtain amino acid residue types for the sequences, extracting document features from the word

protein sequence; elements, and building document feature vectors for the
wherein the preset sliding window has the size of (2*win- protein sequence according to the extracted document

dow+1-2*b), the window is a preset value, and b is a features;

randomly generated variable ranging from 0 to win- 40 a second vector building unit for extracting protein chain

dow-1. biological features from the amino acid sub-sequences

2. The method according to claim 1, wherein before the expressed with the word elements, and building bio-
step of receiving a protein sequence to be predicted, the logical feature vectors for the protein sequence accord-
method further comprises the steps of: ing to the extracted protein chain biological features;

dividing a trained protein sequence in a preset training set 45 and

by using a preset sliding window and sliding step to a result acquisition unit for classifying the amino acid
obtain a plurality of trained amino acid sub-sequences sub-sequences expressed with the document feature
forming the trained protein sequence; vectors and the biological feature vectors by using a
building trained word vectors for the trained protein preset amino acid residue classification model to obtain
sequence according to the plurality of amino acid 50 amino acid residue types for the protein sequence;
sub-sequences, with the trained word vectors having wherein the preset sliding window has the size of (2*win-
trained word elements to express the respective trained dow+1-2*b), the window is a preset value, and b is a
amino acid sub-sequences, extracting document fea- randomly generated variable ranging from 0 to win-
tures from the trained word elements, and building dow-1.
trained document feature vectors for the trained protein 55 7. The apparatus according to claim 6, further comprising:
sequence according to the extracted document features; a trained sequence division unit for dividing a trained
extracting protein chain biological features from the protein sequence in a preset training set by using a
trained amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the preset sliding window and sliding step to obtain a
trained word elements, and building trained biological plurality of trained amino acid sub-sequences forming
feature vectors for the trained protein sequence accord- 60 the trained protein sequence;
ing to the extracted protein chain biological features; a first feature processing unit for building trained word
and vectors for the trained protein sequence according to
training a pre-built classification model by using the the plurality of amino acid sub-sequences, with the
trained amino acid sub-sequences expressed with the trained word vectors having trained word elements to
trained document feature vectors and the trained bio- 65 express the respective trained amino acid sub-se-
logical feature vectors, and when a preset training quences, extracting document features from the trained
termination condition is met, setting the pre-built clas- word elements, and building trained document feature

=== СТРАНИЦА 12 ===
US 11,620,567 B2
13 14
vectors for the trained protein sequence according to
the extracted document features;

a second feature processing unit for extracting protein
chain biological features from the trained amino acid
sub-sequences expressed with the trained word ele- 5
ments, and building trained biological feature vectors
for the trained protein sequence according to the
extracted protein chain biological features; and

a model training unit for training a pre-built classification
model by using the trained amino acid sub-sequences 10
expressed with the trained document feature vectors
and the trained biological feature vectors, and when a
preset training termination condition is met, setting the
pre-built classification model obtained from the train-
ing as the amino acid residue classification model. 15

8. The apparatus according to claim 6, wherein the result

acquisition unit comprises:

a feature merging unit for predicting the biological feature
vectors and performing feature merging on prediction
results predicted and the document feature vectors; and 20

a feature classification unit for classifying merged feature
vectors obtained through the feature merging.

9. Acomputing device, comprising a storage, a processor

and a computer program stored in the storage and runnable
on the processor, wherein the processor executes the com- 25
puter program to accomplish the steps of the method of
claim 1.

* * * * *